Content for review (#2)
NLnetLabs/incremental-deleg: draft-homburg-deleg-incremental-deleg.md

Delegation information is stored at an authoritative location in the zone with this mechanism.
Legacy methods to redirect this information to another location, possible under the control of another operator, such as (CNAME {{Section 3.6.2 of RFC1034}}) and DNAME {{!RFC6672}} remain functional.
One could even outsource all delegation operational practice to another party with an DNAME on the `_deleg` label on the apex of the delegating zone.

Additional to the legacy methods, a delegation may be outsourced to a third party by having an SVCB RRset with a single SVCB RR in AliasMode.

## DNSSEC protection of the delegation {#dnssec-protection}

With legacy delegations, the NS RRset at the parent side of a delegation as well as glue records for the names in the NS RRset are not authoritative and not DNSSEC signed.
An adversary that is able to spoof a referral response, can alter this information and redirect all traffic for the delegation to a rogue name server undetected.
The adversary can then perceive all queries for the redirected zone (Privacy concern) and alter all unsigned parts of responses (such as further referrals, which is a Security concern).

> DNSSEC protection of delegation information prevents that, and is the only counter measure that also works against on-path attackers.

Reviewer: /s/counter measure/countermeasure

At the time of writing, the only way to DNSSEC validate and verify delegations at all levels in the DNS hierarchy is to revalidate delegations {{?I-D.ietf-dnsop-ns-revalidation}}, which is done after the fact and has other security concerns ({{Section 7 of ?I-D.ietf-dnsop-ns-revalidation}}).

> Direct delegation information (provided by SVCB RRs in ServiceMode) include the hostnames of the authoritative name serversfor the delegation as well as IP addresses for those hostnames.

Reviewer: /s/include/includes/ and  /s/serversfor/servers for/

Since the information is stored authoritatively in the delegating zone, it will be DNSSEC signed if the zone is signed.

> When the delegation is outsourced, then the delegation is protected when the zones providing the aliasing resource records *and* the zones serving the targets of the aliases are all DNSSEC signed.

Reviewer: /s/then the delegation/it/ (I feel like the sentence flows beter like this)

## Maximize ease of deployment {#deployability}

Delegation information is stored authoritatively within the delegation zone.
No semantic changes as to what zones are authoritative for what data are needed.
As a consequence, existing DNS software, such as authoritative name servers and DNSSEC signing software, can remain unmodified.
Unmodified authoritative name server software will serve the delegation information when queried for.
Unmodified signers will sign the delegation information in the delegating zone.
Only the recursive resolver needs modification to follow referrals as provided by the delegation information.

Such a resolver would explicitly query for the delegations administered as specified in {{delegation-administration}}.

> The number of round trips form the recursive resolver to the authoritative name server is comparable to what is needed for DNS Query Name Minimisation {{!RFC9156}}.

Reviewer: s/form/from/

Reviewer: Also I feel like comparable implies that it can differ, but im pretty sure it is exactly the same amount of round trips

It is important to have those legacy delegations to maintain support for legacy resolvers, that do not support incremental deleg.
DNSSEC signers SHOULD construct the NS RRset and glue for the legacy delegation from the SVCB RRset.

# Implementation

Support in recursive resolvers suffices for the mechanism to be fully functional.
{{recursive-resolver-behavior}} specifies the basic algorithm for resolving incremental delegations.
In {{presence}}, an optimization is presented that will reduce the number of (parallel) queries especially when authoritative name server support is still lacking and there are still many zones that do not contain incremental delegations.
{{authoritative-name-server-support}} specifies support in the authoritative name server.

## Recursive Resolver behavior

If the triggering query name is the same as the name of the target zone apex, then no further delegation will occur, and resolution will complete.
No special behavior or processing is needed.

Otherwise, the triggering query is below the target zone apex and a delegation may exist in the target zone.

> In this case two parallel queries are send.

Reviewer: /s/send/sent/

The eventual incremental deleg query response, after following all redirections caused by DNAME, CNAME and AliasMode SVCB RRs, has three possible outcomes:

1. An SVCB RRset in ServiceMode is returned in the response's answer section containing the delegation for the subzone.

   The SVCB RRs in the RRset MUST be used to follow the referral.
   The TargetName data field in the SVCB RRs in the RRset MUST be used as the names for the name servers to contact for the subzone, and the ipv4hint and ipv6hint parameters MUST be used as the IP addresses for the TargetName in the same SVCB RR.

   The NS RRset and glue, in the response of the legacy query that was sent in parallel to the incremental deleg query, MUST NOT be used, but the signed DS record (or NSEC(3) records indicating that there was no DS) MUST be used in linking the DNSSEC authentication chain as which would conventionally be done with DNSSEC as well.

2. The incremental deleg query name does not exist (NXDOMAIN).

   There is no incremental delegation for the subzone, and the referral response for the legacy delegation MUST be processed  as would be done with legacy DNS and DNSSEC processing.

> 3. The incremental deleg query name does exist, but resulted in an NOERROR no answer responses (also known as a NODATA response).

Reviewer: /s/an/a/   and   /s/responses/response/

   If the legacy query, did result in a referral for the same number of labels as the subdomain that the incremental deleg query was for, then there was no incremental delegation for the subzone, and the referral response for the legacy delegation MUST be processed as would be done with legacy DNS and DNSSEC processing.

   Otherwise, the subzone may be more than one label below the delegating zone.

   If the response to the legacy query resulted in a referral, then a new incremental deleg query MUST be spawned, matching the zone cut of the legacy referral response.
   For example if the triggering query is `www.university.ac.example.` and the target zone `example.`, and the legacy response contained an NS RRset for `university.ac.example.`, then the incremental deleg query name is `university.ac._deleg.example.`
   The response to the new incremental deleg query MUST be processed as described above, as if it was the initial incremental deleg query.

>    If the legacy query was send minimised and needs a followup query, then parallel to that followup query a new incremental deleg query will be send, adding a single label to the previous incremental deleg query name.

Reviewer: /s/was send/was sent/  /s/will be send/will be sent/   (both future and past tense is sent).

>    For example if the triggering query is `www.university.ac.example.` and the target zone `example.` and the minimised legacy query name was `ac.example.` (which also resulted in a NOERROR no answer response), then the incremental deleg query to be send along in parallel with the followup legacy query will become `university.ac.example.`

Reviewer: s/and the target zone `example.`/and the target zone is `example.`/ and /s/legacy query name was/legacy query name is/ (mixing of past tense and present tense, the triggering query 'is', but the minimised query 'was')    and  s/to be send/to be sent/

>    Processing of the responses of those two new queries will as described above.

Reviewer: /s/will as described above/will be done as described above/

## `_deleg` label presence {#presence}

Absence of the `_deleg` label in a zone is a clear signal that the zone does not contain any incremental deleg delegations.
Recursive resolvers SHOULD NOT send any additional incremental deleg queries for zones for which it is known that it does not contain the `_deleg` label at the apex.
The state regarding the presence of the `_deleg` label within a resolver can be "unknown", "known not to be present", or "known to be present".

> When the presence of a `_deleg` label is "unknown", a `_deleg` presence test query SHOULD be send in parallel to the next query for the zone.

Reviewer: Here it says that a _deleg presence query should be be send when the presence of _deleg is unknown, but in table 1 it says that when there is deleg support in the nameserver no additional query needs to be send even when the _deleg presence is unknown. so i think this statement needs an extra clause that states that this is not needed when it is known that there is nameserver support.

   For the period the existence of the empty non-terminal at the `_deleg` label is cached, the label is "known to be present" and the resolver MUST send additional incremental deleg queries as described in TODO.

3. The `_deleg` label does exist within the zone and contains data.
   A NOERROR response is return with an A RRset in the answer section.

   The returned A RRset in the answer section MUST be cached for the duration indicated by the TTL for the RRset, adjusted to the resolver's TTL boundaries.
   For the period any RRset at the `_deleg` label is cached, the label is "known to be present" and the resolver MUST send additional incremental deleg queries as described in TODO.

## Authoritative name server support

Incremental delegations supporting authoritative name servers do not need the additional (parallel) incremental delegation query, but instead will include the incremental delegation information (or the NSEC(3) records showing the non-existence) in the authority section of referral responses.

> If it is known that an authoritative name server supports incremental deleg, than no direct queries for the incremental delegation need to be send in parallel to the legacy delegation query.

Reviewer: /s/than/then/  and /s/send/sent/    (sentence is in passive voice, thus its sent and not send)

### Referral responses with unsigned zones {#unsigned-zones}

With unsigned zones, only if an incremental deleg delegation exists, the SVCB RRset (or CNAME) will be present in the authority section of referral responses.
Resolvers SHOULD register that authoritative name server supports incremental deleg for the duration indicated by the TTL for the CNAME or SVCB RRset, adjusted to the resolver's TTL boundaries, but only if it is longer than any already registered duration.
If the incremental deleg does not exist, then it is simply absent from the authority section and the referral response is indistinguishable from an non supportive authoritative.

### Resolver behavior with authoritative name server support {#behavior-with-auth-support}

Resolvers can detect support for incremental deleg with authoritative name servers from the returned referral responses.
With DNSSEC signed zones, support is apparent with all referral responses, with unsigned zones only from referral responses for which a incremental delegation exists.

> For as long as the resolver knows that the authoritative name server support incremental deleg, no additional parallel direct deleg query (as described in {{recursive-resolver-behavior}}) needs to be send.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For as long as the resolver knows that the authoritative name server support incremental deleg, no additional parallel direct deleg query (as described in {{recursive-resolver-behavior}}) needs to be sent.
```

However, if the resolver knows that the authoritative name server supports incremental deleg, *and* a DNSSEC signed zone is being served, then all referrals MUST contain either an incremental delegation, or NSEC(3) records showing that the delegation does not exist.

> If a referral is returned that does not contain an incremental delegation nor an indication that is does not exist, and , then the resolver MUST send an additional incremental deleg query to find the incremental delegation (or denial of its existence).

Reviewer 2: s/is/it/
Not sure what comes after “and”

Author: Thanks, when I wrote it I was thinking: "and a _deleg is known to be present in the signed zone", but this is not necessary, because if it wouldn't have been there, then authoritative name server support would also not have been detected. Anyways, resolved in [08385ad](https://github.com/NLnetLabs/incremental-deleg/pull/2/commits/08385adfba80b3512da4d8132cdff551b17f6502)

> If a referral is returned that does not contain an incremental delegation nor an indication that is does not exist, and , then the resolver MUST send an additional incremental deleg query to find the incremental delegation (or denial of its existence).

Author: ```suggestion
If a referral is returned that does not contain an incremental delegation nor an indication that it does not exist, then the resolver MUST send an additional incremental deleg query to find the incremental delegation (or denial of its existence).
```

# Limitations

TODO Limitations

# Comparison with other delegation mechanisms

## Comparison with legacy delegations

## Comparison with Name DNS Query Name Minimisation

## Comparison with {{?I-D.dnsop-deleg}}

# Protocol considerations

**Note to the RFC Editor**: please remove this entire section before publication.

## Outsourcing to more than one operator

{{Section 2.4.1 of !RFC9460}} states that within an SVCB RRset, all RRs SHOULD have the same mode, and that if an RRset contains a record in AliasMode, the recipient MUST ignore any ServiceMode records in the set.
{{Section 2.4.2 of !RFC9460}} states that SVCB RRsets SHOULD only have a single RR in AliasMode, and that if multiple AliasMode RRs are present, clients or recursive resolvers SHOULD pick one at random.

Currently this means that query load can be spread out over multiple operators (even though that is NOT RECOMMENDED), but operationally it would make more sense to allow a resolver to select from all the name servers from all the operators.

> Assumingly SVCB currently supports only a single AliasMode RR in an SVCB RRset because it would otherwise be impossible to interpret the SvcPriority from the SVCB RRsets that is aliased to.

Reviewer: /s/that is aliased/that are aliased/ (RRsets is plural)

## Wildcard incremental delegation

Zones may have a wildcard incremental delegation.
For example:

~~~
$ORIGIN example.
@                  IN  SOA   ns zonemaster ...
*._deleg    86400  IN  SVCB  0 .
customer1._deleg   IN  SVCB  1 ( ns.customer1
                                 ipv4hint=198.51.100.1,203.0.113.1
                                 ipv6hint=2001:db8:1::1,2001:db8:2::1
                               )
customer3._deleg   IN  CNAME _dns.ns.operator1
~~~
{: #wildcard-deleg title="Wildcard incremental deleg to control duration of detected support"}

This may be convenient, for example to signal (with an AliasMode SVCB RR aliasing to the root) that there is no incremental delegation with unsigned zones.
In this case signalling of non-existence works for both signed and unsigned zones.
Furthermore, the zone owner controls the duration a resolver has registered the authoritative name server supports incremental deleg, also for non-existent delegations, with the TTL of the `SVCB 0 .` RR.

# Implementation Status

**Note to the RFC Editor**: please remove this entire section before publication.

> Jesse van Zutphen has build a proof of concept implementation of support of delegations as specified in this document for the Unbound recursive resolver as part of his master thesis for the Security and Network Engineering master program of the University of Amsterdam.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Jesse van Zutphen has built a proof of concept implementation supporting delegations as specified in this document for the Unbound recursive resolver as part of his master thesis for the Security and Network Engineering master program of the University of Amsterdam.
```

No semantic changes as to what zones are authoritative for what data are needed.
As a consequence, existing DNS software, such as authoritative name servers and DNSSEC signing software, can remain unmodified.
Unmodified authoritative name server software will serve the delegation information when queried for.
Unmodified signers will sign the delegation information in the delegating zone.
Only the recursive resolver needs modification to follow referrals as provided by the delegation information.

Such a resolver would explicitly query for the delegations administered as specified in {{delegation-administration}}.
The number of round trips form the recursive resolver to the authoritative name server is comparable to what is needed for DNS Query Name Minimisation {{!RFC9156}}.
Additional implementation in the authoritative name server optimizes resolution and reduces the number of simultaneous in parallel queries to that what would be needed for legacy delegations.
None, mixed or full deployment of the mechanism on authoritative name servers are all fully functional, allowing for the mechanism to be incrementally deployed on the authoritative name servers.

> Implementation in the recursive may be less demanding with respect to (among other things) DNSSEC validation because of not making additional exceptions to what is authoritative at the parent side of a delegation.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Implementation in the recursive may be less demanding with respect to (among other things) DNSSEC validation because there is no need to make additional exceptions as to what is authoritative at the parent side of a delegation.
```

                                 ipv6hint=2001:db8:1::1,2001:db8:2::1
                               )
~~~
{: #zone-within title="One name server within the subzone"}

### Two name servers within the subzone

    $ORIGIN example.
    @                  IN  SOA   ns zonemaster ...
    customer2._deleg   IN  SVCB  1 ns1.customer2 ( ipv4hint=198.51.100.1
                                                   ipv6hint=2001:db8:1::1
                                                 )
                       IN  SVCB  1 ns2.customer2 ( ipv4hint=203.0.113.1
                                                   ipv6hint=2001:db8:2::1
                                                 )
{: #zones-within title="Two name servers within the subzone"}

### Outsourced to an operator

    $ORIGIN example.
    @                  IN  SOA   ns zonemaster ...
    customer3._deleg   IN  CNAME _dns.ns.operator1
{: #outsourced-cname title="Outsourced with CNAME"}

Instead of using CNAME, the outsourcing could also been accomplished with an SVCB RRset with a single SVCB RR in AliasMode.
The configuration below is operationally equivalent to the CNAME configuration above.

> It is RECOMMENDED to use a CNAME over an SVCB RRset with a single SVCB RR in AliasMode ({{Section 10.2 of !RFC9460}}).

Reviewer 3: Maybe a comment is needed that with CNAME you need _dns and with an AliasMode SVCB you don't.

{: #operator-zone title="Operator zone"}

{{Section 2.4.2 of !RFC9460}} states that SVCB RRsets SHOULD only have a single RR in AliasMode, and that if multiple AliasMode RRs are present, clients or recursive resolvers SHOULD pick one at random.
{{Section 2.4.1 of !RFC9460}} states that within an SVCB RRset, all RRs SHOULD have the same mode, and that if an RRset contains a record in AliasMode, the recipient MUST ignore any ServiceMode records in the set.

### DNSSEC signed name servers within the subzone

~~~
$ORIGIN
@                 IN  SOA    ns zonemaster ...
                  IN  RRSIG  SOA ...
                  IN  DNSKEY 257 3 15 ...
                  IN  RRSIG  DNSKEY ...
                  IN  NS     ns.example.
                  IN  NSEC   customer5._deleg SOA RRSIG NSEC DNSKEY
                  IN  RRSIG  NSEC ...

customer5._deleg  IN  SVCB   1 ns.customer5 alpn=h2,h3 (
                                            ipv4hint=198.51.100.5
                                            ipv6hint=2001:db8:5::1
                                            dohpath=/dns-query{?dns}
                                            )
                  IN  RRSIG  SVCB ...

>                   IN  NSEC   customer5 RRSIG NSEC SVCB

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
                  IN  NSEC   customer7._deleg RRSIG NSEC SVCB
```

   The non-existence of the `_deleg` label MUST be cached for the duration indicated by the "minimum" RDATA field of the SOA resource record in the authority section, adjusted to the boundaries for TTL values that the resolver has ({{Section 4 of !RFC8767}}).
   For the period the non-existence of the `_deleg` label is cached, the label is "known not to be present" and the resolver SHOULD NOT send any (additional) incremental deleg queries.

2. The `_deleg` label does exist within the zone but contains no data.
   A NOERROR response is returned with no RRs in the answer section.

   The existence of the `_deleg` name MUST be cached for the duration indicated by the "minimum" RDATA field of the SOA resource record in the authority section, adjusted to the resolver's TTL boundaries.
   For the period the existence of the empty non-terminal at the `_deleg` label is cached, the label is "known to be present" and the resolver MUST send additional incremental deleg queries as described in TODO.

3. The `_deleg` label does exist within the zone and contains data.
   A NOERROR response is return with an A RRset in the answer section.

>    The returned A RRset in the answer section MUST be cached for the duration indicated by the TTL for the RRset, adjusted to the resolver's TTL boundaries.

Reviewer 3: I think this should be formulated in a more neutral way. There doesn't seem any reason to cache the A RRset. Instead the resolver should record that the _deleg label is known to be present for a duration indicated by the A RRset's TTL value.

;; EDNS: version 0; flags: do ; udp: 1232
;; SERVER: 192.0.2.53
;; WHEN: Mon Jul  1 20:36:25 2024
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 456
~~~
{: #deleg-response title="An incremental deleg referral response"}

The referral response in {{deleg-response}} includes the signed SVCB RRset in the authority section.

As another example, querying the zone from {{dnssec-zone}} for `www.customer6.example. A`, will return the following referral response:

~~~
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, rcode: NOERROR, id: 36574
;; flags: qr ; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 0, AUTHORITY: 9, ADDITIONAL: 2
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;; www.customer6.example.       IN      A

;; ANSWER SECTION:

;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
customer6.example.      3600    IN      NS      ns.customer6.example.
customer6.example.      3600    IN      DS      ...
customer6.example.      3600    IN      RRSIG   DS ...
customer5._deleg.example.       1234    IN      NSEC    (
                customer7._deleg.example.  RRSIG NSEC SVCB )
customer5._deleg.example.       1234    IN      RRSIG   NSEC ...
example.        1234    IN      NSEC    (
                customer5._deleg.example.  NS SOA RRSIG NSEC DNSKEY )
example.        1234    IN      RRSIG   NSEC ...

> example.        1234    IN      SOA     ns.example. (

Reviewer 3: Why does this get a SOA record when in the unsigned case there is nothing?

Author: I guess we could leave out the SOA. The **signed** NSEC is enough to know the (negative) TTL.

ns.customer6.example.   3600    IN      AAAA    2001:db8:6::1

;; Query time: 0 msec
;; EDNS: version 0; flags: do ; udp: 1232
;; SERVER: 192.0.2.53
;; WHEN: Tue Jul  2 10:23:53 2024
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 744
~~~
{: #no-incr-deleg-response title="Referral response without incremental deleg"}

Next to the legacy delegation, the incremental deleg supporting authoritative returns the NSEC(3) RRs needed to show that there was no incremental delegation in the referral response in {{no-incr-deleg-response}}.

Querying the zone from {{dnssec-zone}} for `www.customer7.example. A`, will return the following referral response:

~~~
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, rcode: NOERROR, id: 9456
;; flags: qr ; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 0, AUTHORITY: 7, ADDITIONAL: 2
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;; www.customer7.example.       IN      A

;; ANSWER SECTION:

;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
customer7.example.      3600    IN      NS      ns.customer5.example.
customer7.example.      3600    IN      DS      ...
customer7.example.      3600    IN      RRSIG   DS ...
customer7._deleg.example.       3600    IN      CNAME   (
                customer5._deleg.example. )
customer7._deleg.example.       3600    IN      RRSIG   CNAME ...

> customer5._deleg.example.       3600    IN      SVCB    1 (

Reviewer 3: How does this work. Does the target of the CNAME have to have a _dns prefix?

Author: Not in this case, because in this case it is referring to another _deleg set.

Delegation information is stored at an authoritative location in the zone with this mechanism.
Legacy methods to redirect this information to another location, possible under the control of another operator, such as (CNAME {{Section 3.6.2 of RFC1034}}) and DNAME {{!RFC6672}} remain functional.
One could even outsource all delegation operational practice to another party with an DNAME on the `_deleg` label on the apex of the delegating zone.

Additional to the legacy methods, a delegation may be outsourced to a third party by having an SVCB RRset with a single SVCB RR in AliasMode.

## DNSSEC protection of the delegation {#dnssec-protection}

With legacy delegations, the NS RRset at the parent side of a delegation as well as glue records for the names in the NS RRset are not authoritative and not DNSSEC signed.
An adversary that is able to spoof a referral response, can alter this information and redirect all traffic for the delegation to a rogue name server undetected.
The adversary can then perceive all queries for the redirected zone (Privacy concern) and alter all unsigned parts of responses (such as further referrals, which is a Security concern).

> DNSSEC protection of delegation information prevents that, and is the only counter measure that also works against on-path attackers.

Author: ```suggestion
DNSSEC protection of delegation information prevents that, and is the only countermeasure that also works against on-path attackers.
```

At the time of writing, the only way to DNSSEC validate and verify delegations at all levels in the DNS hierarchy is to revalidate delegations {{?I-D.ietf-dnsop-ns-revalidation}}, which is done after the fact and has other security concerns ({{Section 7 of ?I-D.ietf-dnsop-ns-revalidation}}).

> Direct delegation information (provided by SVCB RRs in ServiceMode) include the hostnames of the authoritative name serversfor the delegation as well as IP addresses for those hostnames.

Author: ```suggestion
Direct delegation information (provided by SVCB RRs in ServiceMode) includes the hostnames of the authoritative name servers for the delegation as well as IP addresses for those hostnames.
```

Since the information is stored authoritatively in the delegating zone, it will be DNSSEC signed if the zone is signed.

> When the delegation is outsourced, then the delegation is protected when the zones providing the aliasing resource records *and* the zones serving the targets of the aliases are all DNSSEC signed.

Author: ```suggestion
When the delegation is outsourced, then it's protected when the zones providing the aliasing resource records *and* the zones serving the targets of the aliases are all DNSSEC signed.
```

## Maximize ease of deployment {#deployability}

Delegation information is stored authoritatively within the delegation zone.
No semantic changes as to what zones are authoritative for what data are needed.
As a consequence, existing DNS software, such as authoritative name servers and DNSSEC signing software, can remain unmodified.
Unmodified authoritative name server software will serve the delegation information when queried for.
Unmodified signers will sign the delegation information in the delegating zone.
Only the recursive resolver needs modification to follow referrals as provided by the delegation information.

Such a resolver would explicitly query for the delegations administered as specified in {{delegation-administration}}.

> The number of round trips form the recursive resolver to the authoritative name server is comparable to what is needed for DNS Query Name Minimisation {{!RFC9156}}.

Author: ```suggestion
The number of round trips from the recursive resolver to the authoritative name server is comparable to what is needed for DNS Query Name Minimisation {{!RFC9156}}.
```

                                 ipv6hint=2001:db8:1::1,2001:db8:2::1
                               )
~~~
{: #zone-within title="One name server within the subzone"}

### Two name servers within the subzone

    $ORIGIN example.
    @                  IN  SOA   ns zonemaster ...
    customer2._deleg   IN  SVCB  1 ns1.customer2 ( ipv4hint=198.51.100.1
                                                   ipv6hint=2001:db8:1::1
                                                 )
                       IN  SVCB  1 ns2.customer2 ( ipv4hint=203.0.113.1
                                                   ipv6hint=2001:db8:2::1
                                                 )
{: #zones-within title="Two name servers within the subzone"}

### Outsourced to an operator

    $ORIGIN example.
    @                  IN  SOA   ns zonemaster ...
    customer3._deleg   IN  CNAME _dns.ns.operator1
{: #outsourced-cname title="Outsourced with CNAME"}

Instead of using CNAME, the outsourcing could also been accomplished with an SVCB RRset with a single SVCB RR in AliasMode.
The configuration below is operationally equivalent to the CNAME configuration above.

> It is RECOMMENDED to use a CNAME over an SVCB RRset with a single SVCB RR in AliasMode ({{Section 10.2 of !RFC9460}}).

Author: ```suggestion
It is RECOMMENDED to use a CNAME over an SVCB RRset with a single SVCB RR in AliasMode ({{Section 10.2 of !RFC9460}}).
Note that an SVCB RRset refers with TargetName to an DNS service, which will be looked up using Port Prefix Naming {{Section 3 of RFC9461}}, but that CNAME refers to the domain name of the target SVCB RRset (or CNAME) which may have an `_dns` prefix.
```

Note that both `customer5.example.` and `customer6.example.` have legacy delegations in the zone as well.
It is important to have those legacy delegations to maintain support for legacy resolvers, that do not support incremental deleg.
DNSSEC signers SHOULD construct the NS RRset and glue for the legacy delegation from the SVCB RRset.

# Minimal implementation

Support in recursive resolvers suffices for the mechanism to be fully functional.
{{recursive-resolver-behavior}} specifies the basic algorithm for resolving incremental delegations.
In {{presence}}, an optimization is presented that will reduce the number of (parallel) queries especially for when authoritative name server support is still lacking and there are still many zones that do not contain incremental delegations.

## Recursive Resolver behavior

If the triggering query name is the same as the name of the target zone apex, then no further delegation will occur, and resolution will complete.
No special behavior or processing is needed.

Otherwise, the triggering query is below the target zone apex and a delegation may exist in the target zone.

> In this case two parallel queries are send.

Author: ```suggestion
In this case two parallel queries MUST be sent.
```

The eventual incremental deleg query response, after following all redirections caused by DNAME, CNAME and AliasMode SVCB RRs, has three possible outcomes:

1. An SVCB RRset in ServiceMode is returned in the response's answer section containing the delegation for the subzone.

   The SVCB RRs in the RRset MUST be used to follow the referral.
   The TargetName data field in the SVCB RRs in the RRset MUST be used as the names for the name servers to contact for the subzone, and the ipv4hint and ipv6hint parameters MUST be used as the IP addresses for the TargetName in the same SVCB RR.

   The NS RRset and glue, in the response of the legacy query that was sent in parallel to the incremental deleg query, MUST NOT be used, but the signed DS record (or NSEC(3) records indicating that there was no DS) MUST be used in linking the DNSSEC authentication chain as which would conventionally be done with DNSSEC as well.

2. The incremental deleg query name does not exist (NXDOMAIN).

   There is no incremental delegation for the subzone, and the referral response for the legacy delegation MUST be processed  as would be done with legacy DNS and DNSSEC processing.

> 3. The incremental deleg query name does exist, but resulted in an NOERROR no answer responses (also known as a NODATA response).

Author: ```suggestion
3. The incremental deleg query name does exist, but resulted in a NOERROR no answer response (also known as a NODATA response).
```

   If the legacy query, did result in a referral for the same number of labels as the subdomain that the incremental deleg query was for, then there was no incremental delegation for the subzone, and the referral response for the legacy delegation MUST be processed as would be done with legacy DNS and DNSSEC processing.

   Otherwise, the subzone may be more than one label below the delegating zone.

   If the response to the legacy query resulted in a referral, then a new incremental deleg query MUST be spawned, matching the zone cut of the legacy referral response.
   For example if the triggering query is `www.university.ac.example.` and the target zone `example.`, and the legacy response contained an NS RRset for `university.ac.example.`, then the incremental deleg query name is `university.ac._deleg.example.`
   The response to the new incremental deleg query MUST be processed as described above, as if it was the initial incremental deleg query.

>    If the legacy query was send minimised and needs a followup query, then parallel to that followup query a new incremental deleg query will be send, adding a single label to the previous incremental deleg query name.

Author: ```suggestion
   If the legacy query was sent minimised and needs a followup query, then parallel to that followup query a new incremental deleg query will be sent, adding a single label to the previous incremental deleg query name.
```

>    For example if the triggering query is `www.university.ac.example.` and the target zone `example.` and the minimised legacy query name was `ac.example.` (which also resulted in a NOERROR no answer response), then the incremental deleg query to be send along in parallel with the followup legacy query will become `university.ac.example.`

Author: ```suggestion
   For example if the triggering query is `www.university.ac.example.` and the target zone is `example.` and the minimised legacy query name is `ac.example.` (which also resulted in a NOERROR no answer response), then the incremental deleg query to be sent along in parallel with the followup legacy query will become `university.ac.example.`
```

>    Processing of the responses of those two new queries will as described above.

Author: ```suggestion
   Processing of the responses of those two new queries will be done as described above.
```

## `_deleg` label presence {#presence}

Absence of the `_deleg` label in a zone is a clear signal that the zone does not contain any incremental deleg delegations.
Recursive resolvers SHOULD NOT send any additional incremental deleg queries for zones for which it is known that it does not contain the `_deleg` label at the apex.
The state regarding the presence of the `_deleg` label within a resolver can be "unknown", "known not to be present", or "known to be present".

> When the presence of a `_deleg` label is "unknown", a `_deleg` presence test query SHOULD be send in parallel to the next query for the zone.

Author: ```suggestion
When the presence of a `_deleg` label is "unknown", a `_deleg` presence test query SHOULD be sent in parallel to the next query for the zone (though not when the target name server is known to support incremental deleg, which will be discussed in {{authoritative-name-server-support}}).
```

> The query name for the test query is the `_deleg` label prepended to the apex of zone for which to test presence, with query type A.

Reviewer 4: Why query type A? The rest of the child._deleg.parent queries are with type SVCB.

Author: Because that also works with qname minimisation... But there is a use case for it to be SVCB (when the target zone needs priming).

   The non-existence of the `_deleg` label MUST be cached for the duration indicated by the "minimum" RDATA field of the SOA resource record in the authority section, adjusted to the boundaries for TTL values that the resolver has ({{Section 4 of !RFC8767}}).
   For the period the non-existence of the `_deleg` label is cached, the label is "known not to be present" and the resolver SHOULD NOT send any (additional) incremental deleg queries.

2. The `_deleg` label does exist within the zone but contains no data.
   A NOERROR response is returned with no RRs in the answer section.

   The existence of the `_deleg` name MUST be cached for the duration indicated by the "minimum" RDATA field of the SOA resource record in the authority section, adjusted to the resolver's TTL boundaries.
   For the period the existence of the empty non-terminal at the `_deleg` label is cached, the label is "known to be present" and the resolver MUST send additional incremental deleg queries as described in TODO.

3. The `_deleg` label does exist within the zone and contains data.
   A NOERROR response is return with an A RRset in the answer section.

>    The returned A RRset in the answer section MUST be cached for the duration indicated by the TTL for the RRset, adjusted to the resolver's TTL boundaries.

Author: ```suggestion
   The resolver MUST record that the `_deleg` label is known to be present for a duration indicated by A RRset's TTL value, adjusted to the resolver's TTL boundaries, for example by caching the RRset.
```

Since both delegations are in the same zone, the authoritative name server for `example.` returns both the CNAME realising the alias, as well as the SVCB RRset which is the target of the alias in {{alias-response}}.
In other cases an returned CNAME or SVCB RR in AliasMode may need further chasing by the resolver.
<!-- TODO: Add an AliasMode referral without expansion within the zone -->

With unsigned zones, only if an incremental deleg delegation exists, the SVCB RRset (or CNAME) will be present in the authority section of referral responses.
<!-- TODO: Add a referral response for an unsigned zone -->
If the incremental deleg does not exist, then it is simply absent from the authority section and the referral response is indistinguishable from an non supportive authoritative.
<!-- TODO: Add a non incremental deleg referral response for an unsigned zone -->

## Resolver behavior with authoritative name server support {#behavior-with-auth-support}

Incremental deleg supporting authoritative name servers will include the incremental delegation information (or the NSEC(3) records showing the non-existence) in the authority section of referral responses.

> If it is known that an authoritative name server supports incremental deleg, than no direct queries for the incremental delegation need to be send in parallel to the legacy delegation query.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
If it is known that an authoritative name server supports incremental deleg, then no direct queries for the incremental delegation need to be send in parallel to the legacy delegation query.
```

> A resolver SHOULD register that an authoritative name server supports incremental deleg when the authority section, of the returned referral responses from that authoritative name server, contains incremental delegegation information.

Reviewer 4: How? The _deleg.parent query will/should have already been fired and that cached record is the "registered support". I don't like the wording of registering support because it reads as state needs to be kept per zone. Although that is true, the state is just the cached _deleg.parent answer. And maybe a record type is needed there to get a proper TTL back and not rely on the SOA values.

Author: No, besides zone state, there is also per authoritative state, to know whether it has support for `_deleg` or not.

;; EDNS: version 0; flags: do ; udp: 1232
;; SERVER: 192.0.2.53
;; WHEN: Mon Jul  1 20:36:25 2024
;; MSG SIZE  rcvd: 456
~~~
{: #deleg-response title="An incremental deleg referral response"}

The referral response in {{deleg-response}} includes the signed SVCB RRset in the authority section.

As another example, querying the zone from {{dnssec-zone}} for `www.customer6.example. A`, will return the following referral response:

~~~
;; ->>HEADER<<- opcode: QUERY, rcode: NOERROR, id: 36574
;; flags: qr ; QUERY: 1, ANSWER: 0, AUTHORITY: 9, ADDITIONAL: 2
;; QUESTION SECTION:
;; www.customer6.example.       IN      A

;; ANSWER SECTION:

;; AUTHORITY SECTION:
customer6.example.      3600    IN      NS      ns.customer6.example.
customer6.example.      3600    IN      DS      ...
customer6.example.      3600    IN      RRSIG   DS ...
customer5._deleg.example.       1234    IN      NSEC    (
                customer7._deleg.example.  RRSIG NSEC SVCB )
customer5._deleg.example.       1234    IN      RRSIG   NSEC ...
example.        1234    IN      NSEC    (
                customer5._deleg.example.  NS SOA RRSIG NSEC DNSKEY )
example.        1234    IN      RRSIG   NSEC ...

> example.        1234    IN      SOA     ns.example. (
>                 zonemaster.example. 20240627 7200 3600 1209600 1234 )

Author: ```suggestion
```

> example.        1234    IN      SOA     ns.example. (
>                 zonemaster.example. 20240627 7200 3600 1209600 1234 )
> example.        1234    IN      RRSIG   SOA ...

Author: ```suggestion
```
